Let's begin by visualizing our data.
I've exploited the data from PhysioNet into CSV files and put them in this folder.
We have 17 files,
but we don't really know what's in them or how much data is in each file.
When we look at the file names,
we can see that they're organized with a prefix for the subject ID,
and then there's the activity class.
Because some subjects did multiple bike activities,
the bike activities or suffix with the zero or one.
The first thing we notice is that not all subjects did all activities.
For example, the first two subjects didn't do any running.
I think the third subjects,
only one who did all three activities.
Four and five only run,
nine only walks, and six and eight don't do any biking.
So right away we learn there is some imbalance in terms of the number of classes per
subject and this is going to cause some trouble when we
do leave-one out cross validation later on.
Next, we can look at the number of subjects per class.
So we have three participants who did the biking class,
six participants who walked and five participants who ran.
For the practicalities of machine learning,
what matters more is really the imbalance in terms of the numbers of samples per class.
If that's unbalanced, then our models could be biased towards
the class that has more samples in the training set.
Fewer subjects however means that we'll see
less subject induced variability in our training data.
All right. Let's load the actual data.
We're going to load it into this data structure which is a list of
tuples and the tuple is first the subject ID,
then the activity label,
and then the DataFrame of law accelerometer data.
So that DataFrame looks like this,
where there is one column per accelerometer channel and then each row is its own sample.
So we can figure out how much data we have in this DataFrame by
dividing by the sampling rate to get the seconds of data and then divide it by 60.
We see that we have more than three-and-half minutes of data.
Now let's plot the amount of data points we have per class.
So in this bar chart, we can see that we have
a lot of biking data and almost as much walking data,
but we have quite a bit less running data than the other two classes.
So now we see that in terms of actual samples,
we are imbalanced as well.
All right. Now let's plot our raw data.
Whenever I'm trying to visualize a lot of data,
I use this technique that allows me to interact with the plots and then
advance to the next dataset without having to go back to my code.
So first, I iterate over the entire data set and I plot each individual session,
and then I have this command wait for button press,
which blocks execution until I press a key on the keyboard.
So this will allow me to interact with the plot using the mouse,
and then when I'm ready to see the next plot, I can press the spacebar.
So when we do this, we can see our raw signals here,
x, y, and z accelerometer channels.
We can zoom in and we can interact with
our plot and then we can press the spacebar to advance to the next dataset.
This technique only works if you're in an offline environment.
If you're working within the Udacity workspace,
this won't work for you, but you can still easily explore all your data.
In the upcoming exercise,
I want you to visualize your data like this and come up with a few observations that
might help us build informative features to do activity classification.